.TH MAKECMD 1 "December 2024" "makecmd 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
makecmd \- convert natural language to shell commands using Claude Code
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B makecmd
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] "\fInatural language description\fR"
.br
.B makecmd
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] < \fIinput.txt\fR
.br
.B echo
"\fIdescription\fR" |
.B makecmd
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B makecmd
is a command-line tool that converts natural language descriptions into executable shell commands using Claude Code.
It provides comprehensive security features including input/output sanitization and command validation to ensure safe operation.
.PP
Commands are never automatically executed. Users must manually review and run the generated commands.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-dry\-run
Print the command without any side effects. No clipboard operations or terminal pre-filling.
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-explain
Explain what the generated command does in simple terms.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-safe\-mode
Enable extra restrictions on command generation. Only allows read-only operations.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-no\-cache
Bypass the local cache and always query Claude Code.
.TP
.BR \-D ", " \-\-debug
Enable debug logging to ~/.makecmd/logs/makecmd.log
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " " \fIMODE\fR
Set output mode. Valid modes are:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B auto
(default): Try pre-fill, then clipboard, then display
.IP \(bu 2
.B prefill:
Insert command into terminal prompt (zsh/bash)
.IP \(bu 2
.B clipboard:
Copy command to system clipboard
.IP \(bu 2
.B stdout:
Display command with syntax highlighting
.RE
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-generate\-config
Generate a default configuration file at ~/.makecmdrc
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Basic usage:
.RS
.nf
makecmd "list all python files"
makecmd "show disk usage"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Using the short alias:
.RS
.nf
mkcmd "compress this directory"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Dry run mode:
.RS
.nf
makecmd -d "find large files over 100MB"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Explain mode:
.RS
.nf
makecmd -e "remove empty directories"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Safe mode (read-only operations):
.RS
.nf
makecmd -s "show system information"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Force clipboard output:
.RS
.nf
makecmd -o clipboard "list running processes"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Using pipes:
.RS
.nf
echo "find all log files" | makecmd
cat requirements.txt | makecmd
.fi
.RE
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration file location: ~/.makecmdrc
.PP
Available options:
.TP
.B output_mode
Default output mode (auto, prefill, clipboard, stdout)
.TP
.B cache_ttl
Cache time-to-live in seconds (0 to disable)
.TP
.B safe_mode
Enable safe mode by default (true/false)
.TP
.B debug
Enable debug logging (true/false)
.TP
.B timeout
Claude Code timeout in seconds (max 600)
.TP
.B max_input_length
Maximum input length in characters
.TP
.B color_output
Enable colored output (true/false)
.SH SECURITY
.B makecmd
implements multiple layers of security:
.PP
.B Input Sanitization:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Removes shell metacharacters that could lead to injection
.IP \(bu 2
Validates input length and encoding
.IP \(bu 2
Strips control characters and newlines
.RE
.PP
.B Output Sanitization:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Removes ALL newlines and execution triggers from Claude's output
.IP \(bu 2
Strips ANSI escape sequences and backticks
.IP \(bu 2
Ensures single-line output only
.RE
.PP
.B Command Validation:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Blocks dangerous commands (rm -rf /, dd, format, etc.)
.IP \(bu 2
Detects suspicious patterns and constructs
.IP \(bu 2
Validates command structure and syntax
.IP \(bu 2
Safe mode restricts to read-only operations
.RE
.PP
.B Never Auto-Executes:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Commands are NEVER automatically executed
.IP \(bu 2
User must manually review and run commands
.IP \(bu 2
Clear visual warnings for potentially dangerous commands
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.makecmdrc
User configuration file
.TP
.I ~/.makecmd/cache/
Cache directory for command history
.TP
.I ~/.makecmd/logs/makecmd.log
Debug and error log file
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MAKECMD_CONFIG
Alternative configuration file path
.TP
.B MAKECMD_CACHE_DIR
Alternative cache directory path
.TP
.B MAKECMD_LOG_DIR
Alternative log directory path
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
Invalid input
.TP
.B 2
Claude Code error
.TP
.B 3
Dangerous command detected
.TP
.B 4
Timeout
.TP
.B 5
Configuration error
.TP
.B 6
Missing dependencies
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.B makecmd
requires Claude Code to be installed and authenticated.
Visit https://claude.ai/code for installation instructions.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by the makecmd contributors.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/Cosmic-Skye/makecmd/issues
.PP
For security vulnerabilities, report privately to security@cosmicolabs.com
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2024 makecmd contributors.
License: MIT
.PP
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR claude (1),
.BR bash (1),
.BR zsh (1)
.PP
Full documentation at: https://github.com/Cosmic-Skye/makecmd